From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Bubaro. This is the daily.
[Music]
After rolling back a slew of regulations
aimed at reversing climate change and
pulling funding for the scientists who
monitor it, the Trump administration is
now taking its boldest action yet. It's
eliminating the scientific finding at
the heart of the government's ability to
fight climate change in the first place.
Today, my colleague Lisa Freriedman on
the history of that finding, what it
did, and what happens once it's gone.
[Music]
It's Thursday, July 31st.
Well, thank you to Aaron. It's great to
be here with all of you for what is a a
very big deal. It's a very big
announcement. If finalized,
today's announcement would amount to the
largest deregulatory action in the
history of the United States.
>> Lisa, just to start, I wonder if you can
set the scene for us of this news
conference that occurred just a couple
of days ago.
>> Sure. On Tuesday, Lee Zelden, the EPA
administrator, traveled to Indianapolis
to a truck dealership to make what he
called one of the most significant acts
of deregulation in American history.
>> And what this was was the beginning of a
plan to roll back something called the
Endangerment Finding. And that finding,
>> which I have to confess, I've never
heard of.
>> Many people haven't. But the
endangerment finding is the legal and
scientific basis for regulating
greenhouse gases in the United States
from automobiles, from power plants,
from oil and gas wells and more.
>> Rulem, we are going to have a public
comment period, one that has not taken
place on the endangerment finding over
the course of the last decade and a
half.
>> And how did we get here? Back in 2007,
the Supreme Court ruled in a case called
Massachusetts versus EPA that greenhouse
gases, carbon dioxide, methane, others,
are pollutants and that the EPA can
regulate them if they pose a danger to
human health and welfare.
>> And so the Obama administration when it
came in in 2008 set about to answer that
question. Does climate change indeed
endanger human health in America?
>> And how do they do that?
>> They compiled a report of more than 200
pages looking at the wealth of evidence.
And you know taking you back to that
time 2008 the IPCC the intergovernmental
panel on climate change uh the UN's top
scientific body had just recently
established the most comprehensive
set of of information to that date on
establishing that climate change is
caused by human activities and the
dangers that it poses. It went through
that. It went through findings that US
scientists under the Bush administration
had compiled about the threats of
climate change. Everything from the way
that increased and more intense
wildfires and the smoke from wildfires
affects human health to the increases in
regional ozone pollution that are
exacerbated by climate change. Mhm.
>> And based on this evidence, the Obama
administration determined pretty
conclusively that climate change and the
emissions that are furthering climate
change cause a danger to human health
and welfare.
>> Got it. So that's why it's called
>> the endangerment finding.
>> The endangerment finding because they
put together a finding of endangerment
from greenhouse emissions.
>> Precisely.
>> Okay. And what is the reaction to the
Obama administration compiling and
writing this 200page
report?
>> There's initially a tremendous amount of
push back. The fossil fuel industry is
deeply concerned. The Chamber of
Commerce is deeply concerned. There are
worries that the federal government will
start regulating emissions from Dunkin
Donuts and small businesses and churches
and and synagogues. And where is it
going to stop?
>> Anyone who puts anything into the air.
>> Exactly.
>> And there were efforts to block and to
overturn the endangerment finding and
those failed in court. But pretty soon
this finding that greenhouse gases pose
a danger to Americans becomes the
official position of the US government
when it comes to climate change.
>> And you had said that the finding is
foundational to regulation. So what kind
of regulations spin out of this
endangerment finding once the Obama
people have compiled it, gotten it
through the courts and basically made it
official. So, the things that flow from
the endangerment finding were some of
the first and most important climate
regulations that the United States ever
had.
>> Today, we're here to announce America's
clean power plan.
>> Folks might have heard of the Clean
Power Plan,
>> a plan two years in the making and the
single most important step America has
ever taken in the fight against global
climate change.
That was an effort to reduce emissions
from the utility sector, from power
plants in the United States,
>> reducing methane, from leaks from oil
and gas wells, restrictions on
automobile tailpipe emissions. These are
all things that the EPA was able to do
because of the endangerment finding and
initially under the Obama administration
started to do in a big way.
>> And as I recall, these were very
sweeping regulations. The daily had just
started to come out and we were talking
to people in the coal industry for
example about how this regulation was
going to over time end the coal powered
electric plant industry. That's
absolutely right. But even though some
of these regulations faced setbacks in
the courts, the fundamental ability to
regulate that retained because of the
endangerment finding. So fast forward
just a short time, the global discourse
on climate change has really really
shifted
>> and today the world has officially
crossed the threshold for the Paris
Agreement to take effect.
>> The Obama administration is actively
working toward a global agreement which
by 2015 would become the Paris Agreement
on climate change. And if we follow
through on the commitments that this
Paris agreement embodies, history may
well judge it as a turning point for our
planet.
The oil industry in in Washington, the
American Petroleum Institute
acknowledged climate change and put
itself on record as embracing solutions
like a price on carbon.
>> Right? There seemed to be in this moment
when it came to climate change a loose
alignment of scientific consensus,
government regulation and industry
acceptance, even if it was grudging
acceptance.
>> It was really a high point for people
who acknowledged the urgency of climate
change and wanted to see the world move
towards solutions.
>> Mhm. Then Trump is elected and he
immediately takes aim at any number of
Obama era energy and climate efforts. He
issues an executive order to review and
and they ultimately weaken the clean
power plan. He's looking at methane
regulations, auto emission regulations.
And there is a lot of talk about whether
he will repeal the endangerment finding.
Hm. And how seriously does the president
consider doing that?
>> Well, it didn't happen. And we and
others reported that uh the EPA at that
time made the decision that it was not a
legal fight that it felt it could win
and it wasn't a science fight that they
felt they could win. Hm.
[Music]
>> Interestingly, and I think this dynamic
still holds,
the business community that back in 2009
had been so worried about the
endangerment finding by 2016 had really
lost an appetite for fighting it. M
>> we talked at the time to the Chamber of
Commerce to other large business trade
groups and pretty much all of them at
the time said well no this is settled
now we don't like regulations we'd like
changes to some of these regulations but
this underlying foundation for
acknowledging the dangers of climate
change they're okay with that
>> they were okay with it
>> so this furthers the idea that the
endangerment finding is really here to A
>> yeah embedded
>> until it wasn't.
>> Until it wasn't.
[Music]
>> We'll be right back.
Lisa, before President Trump returns to
office this year and targets this
endangerment finding, in the middle of
his two terms, of course, we have
President Biden, who it seems worth
briefly mentioning, makes regulating
climate change a very big priority and
gets a lot done on that front.
>> Absolutely. The Biden administration
really made addressing climate change a
signature part of its work over the four
years and it strengthened many of the
Obama rules. It put forward very
aggressive automobile emissions rules
that were designed to transition the
nation away from gas-powered cars and
toward electric vehicles.
>> Right. A huge change.
>> Huge. It imposed very strict regulations
on coal fired power plants and new gas
plants. new strict regulations on
methane emissions.
All of these things were happening
because of the endangerment finding. I
think in the four years of the Biden
administration, the endangerment finding
didn't come up in any overt way, but all
of these regulations were fundamentally
made possible because of this finding,
>> right? And so the Biden presidency feels
like a reinforcement of this idea that
the overall
arc of where the United States is going
is this journey toward regulating
emissions and trying to use the
government to reduce them. I mean
clearly Trump broke from that but Biden
brings it back and the sense is this is
directionally still where the country's
at.
>> Exactly. Because you know through the
course of Obama, Trump and Biden, as
much as the first Trump administration
promoted fossil fuels, weakened
regulations, they never attacked this
fundamental understanding which like you
said has really become at by this stage
kind of embedded that climate change is
real. It's driven by human activity. It
is causing threats to the planet and
those threats are endangering human life
and welfare. So talk about how the
second Trump presidency settles on a
strategy of trying to dembed
the endangerment finding.
>> The second Trump administration is a
whole new ball game. Throughout the 2024
campaign, Trump himself had been much
more aggressive in attacking
not just regulations but climate change
science. He joked that climate change
that, you know, sea level rise means
that people have a little bit more
beachfront property. He made it very
clear that there would be no debate over
pulling out of the Paris agreement. That
was going to be a first day activity and
it was
>> right because he had pulled out in his
first term. Biden put us back in and
he's like, I'm going to pull us out
again.
>> Exactly. So, you know, when it came to
something like the endangerment finding,
you know, Trump didn't talk about the
endangerment finding on the campaign
trail, but on his first day in office,
he signed an executive order ordering
the EPA administrator
to make a recommendation about the
legality and applicability of the
endangerment finding.
>> In other words, he makes very clear that
he has this in his sites
>> precisely. And what happens next?
>> So what happens next is behind closed
doors, right? The EPA does not offer
really any visibility into their
process. EPA career staff that had
created the endangerment finding in the
first place were pretty much shut out of
the process. It was never announced or
really very clear who exactly was
working on this. But um about a week
ago, we reported the first details of
the plan.
>> You're being modest. You you broke the
story.
>> Thank you. We reported that the EPA
indeed planned to repeal the
endangerment finding and was building a
case to do that.
>> Well, Lisa, you had said that courts
kept rejecting challenges to the
endangerment finding when Obama first
made it official. So, when the Trump
people decide that they're going to get
rid of it, what legal basis do they have
for getting rid of this?
>> This is undoubtedly going to get
challenged, but the EPA is making a
series of arguments and alternative
arguments. You know, what one legal
scholar described to me as throwing a
bunch of spaghetti to see what sticks
with a court. One of its arguments is
that air pollution is local and they
argue that the EPA doesn't have the
authority to regulate in response to
global climate change.
>> His argument is basically that climate
change is an international phenomenon
that creates dangers that are not from
any one location. Therefore, the US
can't regulate just the local sources of
it.
>> Exactly. Another argument it's making is
that the cost of regulation should be
part of the endangerment finding.
>> Right? Then when when making the
finding, EPA should not just look at the
cost to human health, but also things
like how do high regulatory costs impact
consumers?
Does it deny them consumer choice? Does
it worsen their public health by keeping
older cars on the road? That's a new
argument that we hadn't seen an EPA make
before.
>> One other thing they argue is that even
if the endangerment finding stayed in
place, they're saying that the EPA
shouldn't set standards on greenhouse
gas emissions because no matter what
technology we apply, we can't make a
dent in the problem of global climate
change. Putting aside those legal
arguments, I'm curious
why in your reporting you have found
that the White House has decided to go
after a finding that, as you have
explained very clearly in this
conversation, the industry doesn't
really want anymore. You've made clear
that they have moved on. They have
accepted a lot of the scientific
consensus around climate change and
adjusted their business plans
accordingly.
So if you really pin the Trump people
down, why are they doing this? Is it to
satisfy the hardest right thinkers on
climate? Is it something else?
>> To a large extent, this is about
satisfying a constituency.
Repealing the endangerment finding has
been the holy grail of a lot of groups
that deny climate change. And so what
Trump is doing in moving to repeal this
is really satisfying a request to pull
root and stem the ability to regulate
climate change from the government.
>> And of course this isn't happening in a
vacuum.
>> Correct.
>> It's part of a larger push by the second
Trump administration to change what the
EPA is, who works there, what it does.
Can you briefly put rescending the
endangerment finding into that larger
context?
>> As significant as repealing the
endangerment finding is, and it is very
significant, it's part of a larger story
that we see right now, this
administration is taking away science to
study climate change and the impacts. It
is eliminating programs that help
Americans
prepare for and build resilience to
climate change. So at every level there
is an effort to remove climate change
from the federal government.
>> It feels upon reflection like getting
rid of the endangerment finding bookends
two very different moments in the
climate change conversation in the
United States. when it was created back
in the Obama presidency and and now that
it's coming down. When it was created,
the country had reached this growing
consensus about the importance of taking
on climate change, industry, government,
public opinion. But now, and I wonder
what you think about this, it feels like
the overall mood is different. And that
includes public opinion and it includes
Democrats setting aside climate change
as a major priority. Are we basically
seeing in this bookend moment a country
that's just not as urgently invested in
climate change?
>> I think part of that is really accurate.
Clearly the country is increasingly
divided on both climate change and the
solutions to climate change. Right?
We've seen, you know, support for wind
and solar, for example, drop among
Republicans. But I also don't think that
we're seeing a walk back by either
activists or lawmakers from addressing
climate change. Everything that they had
fought for is is under attack. And
there's no doubt that, you know, this
movement is is on its back heels and
trying to figure out what a new way
forward would be. But I think you still
see, you know, that the majority of
Americans, you know, and and the Pew
polls and others show this acknowledge
climate change, are concerned about
climate change, and want the government
to take some kind of action that there
is a lot of dispute about what? Well,
just to end here, in the same way that
the endangerment finding
codified a trajectory and an outlook on
climate change when it was created, that
was definitely in the direction of
regulating emissions and fighting
climate change. I'm curious as one of
our leading climate reporters, what do
you think it's being rescended and
removed will codify next? I think when
the dust clears
on this legal fight, and there will be a
big legal fight after the repeal of the
endangerment is finalized, I think the
question is going to come back to
Congress. The reason we have had all of
this whiplash with regulations in the
first place is because there is no law
explicitly
mandating the reduction of carbon
emissions in the atmosphere. And so
that's the question that I think is
going to be at the forefront.
>> Not which executive actions stay or get
removed and toggle back and forth, but
whether the legislative branch ever
decides that this is something that it
wants to tackle cuz that's how it
actually becomes permanent.
>> Yeah. It's worth remembering that Obama,
whose administration created the
endangerment finding, he wanted Congress
to be the one to act on climate change.
When Congress failed to pass a big
climate law, at the time it was called
capp trade, he gave a speech where he
said, you know, if Congress doesn't act,
I will.
So, it's been regulatory whiplash from
Democrat and Republican presidents ever
since.
>> Well, speaking of whiplash, is there a
world where future president brings the
endangerment finding back in another
case of whiplash?
>> It's a big question.
And depending on how a court rules once
this is challenged, yes, in theory, a
future president could restore the
endangerment finding, but it would take
a lot of time. It would take a long time
to rebuild the scientific record, the
legal record, and it would take even
more time to turn that into a regulation
to actually start to reduce emissions.
M.
>> So the reality is, I mean, it's easier
to kill the endangerment finding than it
is to build it back up.
[Music]
>> Alisa, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need another day.
On Wednesday, the Federal Reserve defied
President Trump by keeping the interest
rate at its current level, but faced a
highly unusual level of dissent from its
governing board. Two members of the
board publicly disagreed with the
decision, something that has not
happened in more than 20 years. Both
dissenting governors were appointed by
President Trump, who has repeatedly
demanded that the Fed lower interest
rates and has mocked Fed Chairman Jay
Powell for failing to do so.
And former Vice President Kla Harris
said that she will not run for governor
of California next year, ending months
of speculation about whether or not she
would enter the race.
Harris had been exploring a run for the
state's top office since losing the
presidential race against Donald Trump
last fall, but friends said that she has
left open the possibility of running for
president for a third time in 2028.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Sydney
Harper, Carlos Prito, and AA Cherved. It
was edited by Lexi Diao and Chris
Hackel. Contains original music by Dan
Powell, Alicia Etup, and Pat McCusker,
and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Our
theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansk of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Labaro.
See you tomorrow.
[Music]